SIP-26: Non-EVM protocol support (#147)
MetaMask/SIPs: SIPS/sip-26.md

status: Draft
author: Daniel Rocha (@danroc), Frederik Bolding (@FrederikBolding), Alex Donesky (@adonesky1)
created: 2024-08-28
---

## Abstract

This SIP presents an architecture to enable Snaps to expose blockchain-specific
methods to dapps, extending MetaMask's functionality to support a multichain
ecosystem.

## Motivation

Currently, MetaMask is limited to EVM-compatible networks. This proposal aims
to empower developers, both first- and third-party, to use Snaps to add native
support for non-EVM-compatible chains within MetaMask.

## Specification

> Formal specifications are written in TypeScript.

### Language

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" written
in uppercase in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC
2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt).

### High-Level architecture

The diagram below represents a high-level architecture of how the RPC Router
integrates inside MetaMask to allow Snaps to expose protocol methods to dapps
and the MetaMask clients.

![High-level architecture](../assets/sip-26/components-diagram.png)

> - **Account Snaps**: Snaps that implement the Keyring API and are responsible
>   for signing requests and managing accounts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Account Snaps**: Snaps that implement the [Keyring API][keyring-api] and are responsible
  for signing requests and managing accounts.
```

Reviewer 2: Resolved this in my PR

- **Protocol Snaps**: Snaps that implement protocol methods that do not require
  an account to be executed.

- **RPC Router**: Native component that forwards RPC requests to the

>   appropriate Protocol Snap, Account Snap or native implementation.

Reviewer: I believe its more likely that requests that can be handled by native implementation will not reach the RPC Router
```suggestion
  appropriate Protocol Snap or Account Snap.
```

Reviewer: This also appears to match @FrederikBolding's [current implementation](https://github.com/MetaMask/snaps/pull/2875/files#diff-5697fc531248874f2ce02e26e9e13fee8222753070a8c8e107de6c281ba220afR246)

Reviewer 2: Resolved this in my PR

appropriate Protocol Snap.

#### Snaps Keyring

The Snaps Keyring is an existing native component that exposes the
[snap_manageAccounts][snap-manage-accs] method, allowing Account Snaps to
register, remove, and update accounts.

For example, this code can be used by an Account Snap to register a new account
with the Account Router:

```typescript
// This will notify the Account Router that a new account was created, and the
// Account Router will register this account as available for signing requests
// using the `eth_signTypedData_v4` method.
await snap.request({
  method: 'snap_manageAccounts',
  params: {
    method: 'notify:accountCreated',
    params: {
      account: {
          id: '74bb3393-f267-48ee-855a-2ba575291ab0',
          type: 'eip155:eoa',
          address: '0x1234567890123456789012345678901234567890',
          methods: ['eth_signTypedData_v4'],
          options: {},
      },
    },
  },
});
```

Similar events are available to notify about the removal and update of
accounts: `notify:accountRemoved` and `notify:accountUpdated`.

Additionally, the Snaps Keyring expects the Account Snap to implement the

> Keyring API so it can forward signing requests to it through the

Reviewer: can we link to this `Keyring API` here?

Reviewer: Or is `Keyring API` just describing the `snaps_manageAccounts` method?

that implement the [Keyring API][keyring-api]).

## Motivation

The Keyring API is being modified to support non-EVM chains. However, a
challenge arises in identifying the correct account Snap that should receive
the signing request, as this information is often only obtainable from the
request itself, which varies based on the method and chain.

## Specification

> Formal specifications are written in TypeScript.

### Language

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" written
in uppercase in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC
2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt).

### High-Level architecture

The diagram below represents a high-level architecture of how the Account
Router integrates with the RPC Router, Account Snaps, and Protocol Snaps.

![High-level architecture](../assets/sip-26/components-diagram.png)

- **Account Snaps**: Snaps that implement the Keyring API and are responsible
  for signing requests and managing accounts.

- **Protocol Snaps**: Snaps that implement protocol methods that do not require

>   an account to be executed.

Reviewer: I thought per our discussions with @rekmarks we'd determined that we can't enforce separation of Account + Protocol Snaps?
![Accounts SIP (1)](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6f7fe6a8-3a39-43e4-9773-814d052fe101)

Reviewer: Oh I see the language saying these can be combined. I think its more confusing to represent them as (sortof) separate in the diagram. 

As I believe I said in our meeting I don't think we're really getting anything by having these non signing protocol snaps that implement non signing methods if the signing snaps can trivially handle those requests too.

In that case I feel like its clearer to call them something more general than "Account Snaps" since they are not just handling accounts. Maybe "Protocol Snaps" or "CAIP-2 Snaps" (though I'd prefer something that clearly states its purpose without external reference).

Reviewer 3: To restate what I said in a meeting: As I read it, they are just two separate permissions that a Snap may or may not put together, and some Snaps (e.g. hardware wallet or SCAs) may want to only ship the account part.

- **RPC Router**: Native component that forwards non-signing requests to the
  appropriate Protocol Snap or native implementation.

- **Account Router**: Native component that forwards signing requests to the

>   appropriate Account Snap or native implementation.

Reviewer 4: I see that the `Account Router` is the one that registers signing methods to the `RPC Router`, but how are the signing methods registered into the `Account Router`?

Author: They are listed in the account object in the `methods` field. 

But it made me think of another problem: the account doesn't list the supported chains (there is a method to get this information, but we should probably move it into the account object).

- **Account Address Resolution Snaps**: Snaps that implement the
  `resolveAccountAddress` method to extract the account address from the

>   request object.

Reviewer 3: Can these Snaps be the same as Account and Protocol Snaps, or do they have to be separate?

### Account Router

The Account Router exposes the [`snap_manageAccounts`][snap-manage-accs] method
to allow account Snaps to register, remove, and update accounts.

For example, this code can be used by an Account Snap to register a new account
with the Account Router:

```typescript
// This will notify the Account Router that a new account was created, and the
// Account Router will register this account as available for signing requests
// using the `eth_signTypedData_v4` method.
await snap.request({
  method: 'snap_manageAccounts',
  params: {
    method: 'notify:accountCreated',
    params: {
      account: {

>           id: '74bb3393-f267-48ee-855a-2ba575291ab0',

Reviewer 5: the snap itself creates the id? we probably shouldn't leave these `id`s up to the developer.

Author: Yeah, they are UUIDv4, the extension enforces that they are unique when an account is registered.

          type: 'eip155:eoa',

>           address: '0x1234567890123456789012345678901234567890',

Reviewer 5: this should be a caip-10 address to include the chainid which is missing context here when creating an account:

```
eip155:1:0xab16a96D359eC26a11e2C2b3d8f8B8942d5Bfcdb
```

Reviewer: Yea agreed. We will need some way to associate this account with the appropriate [CAIP-2](https://github.com/ChainAgnostic/CAIPs/blob/main/CAIPs/caip-2.md) identifier for routing purposes, whether its making these CAIP-10 addresses or adding a CAIP-2 property on the object.

Reviewer: 🤔 Do we have a plan for how to handle types that are not `eip155:eoa` then? Seems like we should include a CAIP-2 scope(s) property here?

Reviewer: is there documentation we could link to where this `type` property is defined/scoped?

          methods: ['eth_signTypedData_v4'],

>           options: {},

Reviewer 5: what would go in `options`?

Author: This is part of the Keyring API and is used by Snap devs to store implementation-dependent information about the account. An example would be to use it to store the tresholds, index, and other metadata used by MPC accounts.

      },
    },
  },
});
```

Similar events are available to notify about the removal and update of
accounts: `notify:accountRemoved` and `notify:accountUpdated`.

Additionally, the Account Router expects the Account Snap to implement the
Keyring API so it can forward signing requests to it through the
[`keyring_submitRequest`][submit-request] method.

### Account Address Resolution Snaps

The Account Address Resolution Snaps are responsible for extracting the account
address that should receive the signing request from the request object. This
is accomplished by exposing the `resolveAccountAddress` method to the Account
Router.

```typescript
/**
 * Returns the address of the account that should handle the signing request.
 *
 * @param request - The request object.
 * @returns The account address or `undefined` if the address could not be
 * resolved.
 */
function resolveAccountAddress(request: MultichainRequest): string | undefined;
```

There must be only one Account Resolution Snap registered per chain to prevent
ambiguity in the account resolution process.

> To identify which Account Resolution Snap should be used for a given request,
> Account Address Resolution Snaps MUST list the supported chains in their
> manifest file:

Reviewer 4: Nit,

```suggestion
To identify which Account Resolution Snap should be used for a given request,
Account Address Resolution Snaps MUST list the supported chains in their
manifest file using the [CAIP-2][caip-2] format for chain IDs:
```

```json5
"initialPermissions": {
  "endowment:account-address-resolver": {
    "chains": [
      "<chain_id_1>",
      "<chain_id_2>",
      // ...
    ]

>   }

Reviewer 5: same as below, should resemble caip-25 permission: https://github.com/MetaMask/SIPs/pull/147/files#r1777172390

}
```

Note that the `reference` part of the [CAIP-2][caip-2] chain ID can be a `*`
wildcard to match any chain ID of a given namespace (e.g., `eip155:*`).

The RPC Router subscribes to Snap installation events to detect new Account
Address Resolution Snaps and updates its internal routing table accordingly.

### Protocol Snaps

Protocol Snaps implement and expose methods that do not require an account to
execute and MUST list their supported methods in their manifest file:

```json5
"initialPermissions": {
  "endowment:protocol-methods": {
    "chains": {
      "<chain_id_1>": [
        // List of supported methods
      ]

>     }

Reviewer 5: this should probably resemble caip-25 and the permission we just created and migrated the old account permissions to:

```

   "eip155:1": {
      "methods": ["eth_sendTransaction", "eth_signTransaction", "eth_sign", "get_balance", "personal_sign"],
      "notifications": []
   },
```

integrates inside MetaMask to allow Snaps to expose protocol methods to dapps
and the MetaMask clients.

![High-level architecture](../assets/sip-26/components-diagram.png)

- **Account Snaps**: Snaps that implement the [Keyring API][keyring-api] and are responsible
  for signing requests and managing accounts.

- **Protocol Snaps**: Snaps that implement protocol methods that do not require
  an account to be executed.

- **RPC Router**: Native component that forwards RPC requests to the
  appropriate Protocol Snap or Account Snap.

- **Keyring Controller**: Native component responsible for forwarding signing
  requests to the appropriate keyring implementation.

- **Accounts Controller**: Native component responsible for managing accounts
  inside MetaMask. It stores all non-sensitive account information.

- **Snaps Keyring**: Native component that acts as a bridge between the
  Keyring Controller and the Account Snaps.

### Components

Here is a brief description of the components involved in this architecture
which will require to be implemented or modified.

#### RPC Router

The RPC Router will be a new native component responsible for routing JSON-RPC

> requests to the appropriate Snap or keyring.

Reviewer: Is it confusing to separate `keyring` from Snap here since all the keyrings we route to are Snap keyrings?
```suggestion
requests to the appropriate Snap.
```

> To route a request, the RPC Router MUST extract the method name and chain ID

Reviewer: [nit]
```suggestion
To route a request, the RPC Router MUST extract the method name and [CAIP-2 chainId][caip-2]
```

from the request object. It then determines whether the method is supported by
a Protocol Snap or an Account Snap, with Account Snaps taking precedence over
Protocol Snaps.

If the method is supported by an Account Snap, the RPC Router forwards the
request to the Keyring Controller; otherwise, it forwards the request to the
appropriate Protocol Snap.

#### Snaps Keyring

The Snaps Keyring is an existing native component that exposes the
[snap_manageAccounts][snap-manage-accs] method, allowing Account Snaps to
register, remove, and update accounts.

For example, this code can be used by an Account Snap to register a new account
with the Account Router:

```typescript
// This will notify the Account Router that a new account was created, and the
// Account Router will register this account as available for signing requests
// using the `eth_signTypedData_v4` method.
await snap.request({
  method: "snap_manageAccounts",
  params: {
    method: "notify:accountCreated",
    params: {
      account: {
        id: "74bb3393-f267-48ee-855a-2ba575291ab0",
        type: "eip155:eoa",
        address: "0x1234567890123456789012345678901234567890",

>         methods: ["eth_signTypedData_v4"],

Reviewer: Also I'm still wondering how we plan to standardize non-evm account types. Currently our [documentation](https://docs.metamask.io/snaps/reference/keyring-api/account-management/objects/#keyringaccount) only appears to describe `eip155:eoa` or `eip155:erc4337`

>         methods: ["eth_signTypedData_v4"],

Reviewer 2: I have been requesting this as well, we need a more generic type that allows any protocol. IIRC @danroc and team are thinking about how to do that.

        options: {},
      },
    },
  },
});
```

Similar events are available to notify about the removal and update of
accounts: `notify:accountRemoved` and `notify:accountUpdated`.

Additionally, the Snaps Keyring expects the Account Snap to implement the
Keyring API so it can forward signing requests to it through the
[`keyring_submitRequest`][submit-request] method.

#### Account Snaps

As part of the Keyring API, non-EVM Account Snaps MUST also implement support
for the `keyring_resolveAccountAddress` RPC method defined below. It is used
by the RPC Router to extract the address of the account that should handle
the signing request from the request object.

```typescript
type ResolveAccountAddressRequest = {
  method: "keyring_resolveAccountAddress";
  params: {
    scope: CaipChainId;
    request: JsonRpcRequest;
  };
};
```

The implementation MUST return a value of the type `{ address: string }` or `null`.

#### Protocol Snaps

Protocol Snaps implement and expose methods that do not require an account to

> execute and MUST list their supported methods in their manifest file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
execute and MUST list their supported methods and notifications in their manifest file:
```

```json5
"initialPermissions": {
  "endowment:protocol": {
    "scopes": {
      "<chain_id_1>": {
        "methods": [
          // List of supported methods
        ],
        "notifications": [
          // List of supported notifications
        ]
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Additionally protocol Snaps MUST implement the `onProtocolRequest` handler:

```typescript
import { OnProtocolRequestHandler } from "@metamask/snap-sdk";

export const onProtocolRequest: OnProtocolRequestHandler = async ({
  origin,
  scope,
  request,
}) => {
  // Return protocol responses
};
```

The interface for an `onProtocolRequest` handler function’s arguments is:

```typescript
interface OnProtocolRequestArguments {
  origin: string;
  scope: CaipChainId;
  request: JsonRpcRequest;
}
```

`origin` - The origin making the protocol request (i.e. a dapp).

> `scope` - The scope of the request, currently a chain ID as defined by the [CAIP-2 specification][caip-2].

Reviewer: nit
```suggestion
`scope` - The [CAIP-2][caip-2] chainId the request is targeting.
```

  params: {
    method: "notify:accountCreated",
    params: {
      account: {
        id: "74bb3393-f267-48ee-855a-2ba575291ab0",
        type: "eip155:eoa",
        address: "0x1234567890123456789012345678901234567890",
        methods: ["eth_signTypedData_v4"],
        options: {},
      },
    },
  },
});
```

Similar events are available to notify about the removal and update of
accounts: `notify:accountRemoved` and `notify:accountUpdated`.

Additionally, the Snaps Keyring expects the Account Snap to implement the
Keyring API so it can forward signing requests to it through the
[`keyring_submitRequest`][submit-request] method.

#### Account Snaps

As part of the Keyring API, non-EVM Account Snaps MUST also implement support
for the `keyring_resolveAccountAddress` RPC method defined below. It is used
by the RPC Router to extract the address of the account that should handle
the signing request from the request object.

```typescript
type ResolveAccountAddressRequest = {
  method: "keyring_resolveAccountAddress";
  params: {
    scope: CaipChainId;
    request: JsonRpcRequest;
  };
};
```
`scope` - The [CAIP-2][caip-2] chainId the request is targeting

> `request` - A `JsonRpcRequest` containing strictly JSON-serializable values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`request` - A `JsonRpcRequest` containing strictly JSON-serializable values.

```
